# ChrysaLisp

![](./screen_shot_1.png)

------

Finally got round to implementing a heap collector ! You can clearly see the
effect by watching the Netmon app while running builds and so forth etc.

What I didn't expect was the performance gain from this. I suspect this is down
to the collector sorting the free lists into batches that map to each block, as
well as freeing up page table space on the host.

Seeing 0.55s builds now on the MacBook, and 7s builds on the Raspberry PI3. But
most importantly, memory is now freed back to the host OS during runtime !

------

Making some attempts to rename functions and macros to better fit with Common
Lisp. I'm not trying to duplicate the exact functionality, but at least make
things a little more familiar where it makes sense.

Added the (case) macro that helps with building a jump table dispatched case
clauses. Nice use of Lisp macros that one.

Updated the C++ ChrysaLisp to be able to build the latest OS image.

After all the lowering to VP work the MacBook build is now benchmarking at 0.7s
and the Raspberry PI3 build time has dropped from 12.5s to 9.2s, that's a great
result for the effort.

------

Worked through almost all the Lisp bindings to convert to VP. Saved several KB
on the boot image size as a result. Plus a small but worthwhile speed up.

------

Looks like SDL 2.0.9 fixes the 2.0.8 red screen on Mojave problem !!! So I'm
removing the temp fix for that problem. Thanks SDL crew for sorting this out in
this release.

------

A couple of improvements to the Kernel class code, specifically the opts
processing code that now gets used as part of the general process launch
handling as well as the -run boot option.

Will be out of action a few days due to suffering a Vertical Root Fracture and
emergency dental extraction ! Ouch. :(

------

Did a few more class lib tidy ups and VP lowering. Plus converted the TUI to
be written in Lisp ! That one has been on my mind for a while and it got back
around 1.5KB of boot image !

------

Moved the Lisp class bindings out to the classes that provide the functionality
being used. I still want to tidy up the Lisp boot.inc file to just include a
set of finer grained lisp.inc files though.

Lowered the stream class Lisp bindings to VP. Now that the bindings are
separated out it's going to be easier to get round to doing this to the rest of
them.

------

Last of the GUI apps, the terminal, converted over to Lisp. I'm going to have
to sort out a better way to handle the mailbox select functionality for Lisp
eventually, the change to pipe::select to get the Terminal app over to Lisp is
a bit of a bodge.

On prompting from no-identd I took a look at Anaphoric macros and agree that
they can be useful but folks should be aware of what the issues are if you use
them. So I've added the obvious ones to boot.inc. Maybe they should be going in
a separate class/lisp/anaphoric.inc file ?

------

Not had a huge amount of free time so did a few conversions to VP level code on
some critical Lisp functions. A little extra performance and helps to keep the
size of the boot image in check. Can always knock out a few VP conversions if
time won't allow anything more substantial.

I decide to change the 'sys_mem 'realloc to not trash r6-r7. Thoughts on this
are that if your going to end up doing the memory copy then the 2 registers
push/pop is no big deal, but the functions that use this can benefit from
having there iterators held in registers and not stack variables and that is a
far better situation.

------

Implemented a Lisp version of my PCB viewer app. Used it to thrash out some
issues with the circle drawing flatness tests. Plus it's a great demo of what
200 lines of Lisp can do. :)

------

Reorganised the obj/ folder to take advantage of the now common abi binaries !
Saved nearly 100KB on the snapshot.zip file as a result of the shared binaries
between Darwin and Linux x86_64 platforms.

------

Tidied up the source trying to keep to a consistent style for register equated
source with (list) format rather than quasi-quote format.

------

Added support for type 1 pixel types to the .CPM loader. This enabled me to
load the shadow file for the Boing demo. This also means that the stream class
now supports a read_bits method for variable length data reading. write_bits
method will come along soon as part of the .CPM saving routines.

------

Created a list of symbols, `*func-syms*`, that get undef'd at the close of each
function in order to avoid cross contamination between labels and symbols and
raise errors at compilation time when such happens.

------

Added the shared memory link driver code for Windows platform and created
run.bat, run_tui.bat and run_mesh.bat launch scripts. Windows seams a little
slow on starting up the 64 CPU mesh compared to MacOS or Linux, but it does run
just fine. Enjoy.

------

Implemented the ability to draw anti-aliased polygons directly without needing
to super sample the canvas buffer. Both options are now available, even in
combination ! The anti-aliased routine uses an 8x rooks pattern sampling, which
seams pretty good and has good performance. At some future date I may need to
revisit the simple x sort as it's only fast provided there are not loads of
active edges.

------

A fix for the none-blocking stdin on Windows is done. However this shows up
another bug in Windows that you have to press enter twice to get stdin from the
console ! And the ESC key doesn't get sent through to stdin. Seams these issues
are know issues with Windows. I'll keep a look out for any updates and fixes
for this. For now however the TUI situation is restored to normal on all other
platforms and Windows TUI is far more useable than it was.

------

Many thanks to Martyn Bliss for pushing the Windows port forward. We now have
support for running on Windows 64bit. A few things remain to be done to get the
Windows version running a multiple virtual CPU network, but the GUI is now
running and the TUI is able to be used to compile and build images.

Due to Windows not supporting none-blocking reads from STDIN I'm in the middle
of changing things around to deal with this issue, so temporally the TUI can't
run interactive commands. The GUI terminal can do that still, this only effects
the TUI. This is top of the list to fix !

------

Got another hospital visit for the eyes :( Lots of garbage in my vision still,
but getting some useful documentation done and a few things to help out on the
Windows port.

Tried to concentrate on documenting the aspects of the VP and C-Script coding
that most people will be wondering about when looking at the source files. I
know what it's like when you read a statement and a huge lightbulb goes on in
your head. It's so easy to just assume these things are obvious when you wrote
the code to start with !

------

I have a torn retina ! Not sure how this happened, but just had laser treatment
to weld things down. So not a lot of screen time at the moment !

------

Big drive to get the platform isolation interface (PII) as simple as possible.
Started a windows branch for the windows port, thanks to some prompting by
BannanaEarwig.

------

Happy now with the polygon and stroking APIs after playing around with the new
analogue clock face demo. Makes a real difference the the flow of the source
code after rearranging the parameter ordering.

------

Implemented a set of long vector methods on the points class. Thinking along
the lines of numpy. Even though there not specifically for short 2D and 3D
vectors they have helped the Raymarch demo to go lots faster as far less churn
of objects happens.

Got plans to implement a genetic algorithm trained neural network 'evolving
bugs' demo using the long vectors as a way to shake down the API and tune
performance.

------

Implementation of system services allowed me to implement a multi-thread
debugger and single stepping logger. The Boing demo and Global tasks test now
exercise the features. New Debug app is in apps/debug/app.lisp, note there is
only Lisp code involved in this app. :)

------

Took a detour to create a C++ version of ChrysaLisp to directly compare with my
hand rolled compiler and format. The Lisp side of that project is now done and
can build the full OS from the same source files.

Based on comparison builds of the ChrysaLisp OS source using its own
compiler/assembler and the C++ version, ChrysaLisp native is around 2.5x faster
than the Clang C++ version.

The C++ Lisp executable on its own is currently 279kb, while the entire
ChrysaLisp OS including its compiler and Lisp and libraries, GUI etc, is 165kb.

https://github.com/vygr/ChrysaLisp-

Regards all

Chris
